Formalize spec (#882)
scverse/anndata: docs/fileformat-prose.md

```python
>>> import h5py
>>> f = h5py.File("02_processed.h5ad", "r")
>>> list(f.keys())
['X', 'layers', 'obs', 'obsm', 'uns', 'var', 'varm']
```

<!-- ```bash
$ h5ls 02_processed.h5ad
X                        Group
layers                   Group
obs                      Group
obsm                     Group
uns                      Group
var                      Group
varm                     Group
``` -->

In general, `AnnData` objects are comprised of a various types of elements.
Each element is encoded as either an Array (or Dataset in hdf5 terminology) or a collection of elements (e.g. Group) in the store.
We record the type of an element using the `encoding-type` and `encoding-version` keys in it's attributes.
For example, we can this file represents an `AnnData` object from this metadata:

```python
>>> dict(f.attrs)
{'encoding-type': 'anndata', 'encoding-version': '0.1.0'}
```

Using this information, we're able to dispatch onto readers for the different element types that you'd find in an anndata.

### Element Specification

* An element can be any object within the storage hierarchy (typically an array or group) with associated metadata

> * An element MUST have a string valued field `"encoding-type"` in it's metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An element MUST have a string valued field `"encoding-type"` in its metadata
```

Reviewer: maybe `string-valued`?

Author: ```suggestion
* An element MUST have a string-valued field `"encoding-type"` in its metadata
```

> * An element MUST have a string valued field `"encoding-version"` in it's metadata that can be evaluated to a version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An element MUST have a string-valued field `"encoding-version"` in its metadata that can be evaluated to a version
```

### AnnData specification (v0.1.0)

* An `AnnData` object MUST be a group. 
* The group's metadata MUST include entries: `"encoding-type": "anndata"`, `"encoding-version": "0.1.0"`.

> * An `AnnData` group MUST contain entries `"obs"` and `"var"`, which MUST be dataframes.

Reviewer: yet they can be empty dataframes but with specified index? I would specify that

Author: ```suggestion
* An `AnnData` group MUST contain entries `"obs"` and `"var"`, which MUST be dataframes (though this may only have an index with no columns).
```

* The group MAY contain a mapping `varm`. Entries in `varm` MUST be sparse arrays, dense arrays, or dataframes. These entries MUST have a first dimension of size `n_var`
* The group MAY contain a mapping `obsp`. Entries in `obsp` MUST be sparse or dense arrays. The entries first two dimensions MUST be of size `n_obs`
* The group MAY contain a mapping `varp`. Entries in `varp` MUST be sparse or dense arrays. The entries first two dimensions MUST be of size `n_var`
* The group MAY contain a mapping `uns`. Entries in `uns` MUST be an anndata encoded type.

## Dense arrays

Dense numeric arrays have the most simple representation on disk,
as they have native equivalents in H5py {doc}`h5py:high/dataset` and Zarr {ref}`Arrays <zarr:tutorial_create>`.
We can see an example of this with dimensionality reductions stored in the `obsm` group:

```python
>>> f["obsm"].visititems(print)
X_pca <HDF5 dataset "X_pca": shape (38410, 50), type "<f4">
X_umap <HDF5 dataset "X_umap": shape (38410, 2), type "<f4">

>>> dict(f["obsm"]["X_pca"].attrs)

> {'encoding-type': 'array', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0'}

Reviewer: here the encoding-version is 0.2.0 how is that related to the anndata version 0.1.0 ?

Author: It's the version of the array encoding, not the anndata encoding. Those are independent.

```

<!-- ```bash
$ h5ls 02_processed.h5ad/obsm
X_pca                    Dataset {38410, 50}
X_umap                   Dataset {38410, 2}
``` -->

### Dense arrays specification (v0.2.0)

* Dense arrays MUST be stored in an Array object
* Dense arrays MUST have the entries `'encoding-type': 'array'` and `'encoding-version': '0.2.0'` in their metadata

## Sparse arrays

Sparse arrays don’t have a native representations in HDF5 or Zarr,
so we've defined our own based on their in-memory structure.
Currently two sparse data formats are supported by `AnnData` objects, CSC and CSR
(corresponding to {class}`scipy.sparse.csc_matrix` and {class}`scipy.sparse.csr_matrix` respectively).
These formats represent a two-dimensional sparse array with
three one-dimensional arrays, `indptr`, `indices`, and `data`.

```{note}
A full description of these formats is out of scope for this document,
but are [easy to find].
```

We represent a sparse array as a `Group` on-disk,
where the kind and shape of the sparse array is defined in the `Group`'s attributes:

```python
>>> dict(f["X"].attrs)
{'encoding-type': 'csr_matrix',
 'encoding-version': '0.1.0',
 'shape': array([38410, 27899])}
```

> Inside the group are the three constituent arrays:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside the group there are three constituent arrays:
```

Author: ```suggestion
The group contains three arrays:
```

```python
>>> f["X"].visititems(print)
data <HDF5 dataset "data": shape (41459314,), type "<f4">
indices <HDF5 dataset "indices": shape (41459314,), type "<i4">
indptr <HDF5 dataset "indptr": shape (38411,), type "<i4">
```

<!-- ```bash
$ h5ls 02_processed.h5ad/X
data                     Dataset {41459314/Inf}
indices                  Dataset {41459314/Inf}
indptr                   Dataset {38411/Inf}
``` -->

### Sparse array specification (v0.1.0)

> * Each sparse array MUST be it's own group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Each sparse array MUST be its own group
```

* The group's metadata MUST contain:
    * `"encoding-type"`, which is set to `"csr_matrix"` or `"csc_matrix"` for compressed sparse row and compressed sparse column, respectively.
    * `"encoding-version"`, which is set to `"0.1.0"`
    * `"shape"` which is an integer array of length 2 whose values are the sizes of the array's dimensions

## DataFrames

DataFrames are saved as a columnar format in a group, so each column of a DataFrame is saved as a separate array.
We save a little more information in the attributes here.

```python
>>> dict(f["obs"].attrs)
{'_index': 'Cell',
 'column-order': array(['sample', 'cell_type', 'n_genes_by_counts',
        'log1p_n_genes_by_counts', 'total_counts', 'log1p_total_counts',
        'pct_counts_in_top_50_genes', 'pct_counts_in_top_100_genes',
        'pct_counts_in_top_200_genes', 'pct_counts_in_top_500_genes',
        'total_counts_mito', 'log1p_total_counts_mito', 'pct_counts_mito',
        'label_by_score'], dtype=object),
 'encoding-type': 'dataframe',
 'encoding-version': '0.2.0'}
```

These attributes identify the index of the dataframe, as well as the original order of the columns.

> Each column in this dataframe is encoded as it's own array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each column in this dataframe is encoded as its own array.
```

Reviewer: also `DataFrame` or `dataframe` ?

```python
>>> dict(f["obs"]["total_counts"].attrs)
{'encoding-type': 'array', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0'}

>>> dict(f["obs"]["cell_type"].attrs)
{'encoding-type': 'categorical', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0', 'ordered': False}
```

### Dataframe Specification (v0.2.0)

* A dataframe MUST be stored as a group

> * The group's metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The group's metadata:
```

>     * MUST contain the field `"_index"`, which is the name of the column to be used as an index

Reviewer 2: The `'_index'` above is `'Cell'` but that doesn't appear in `'column-order'`. I assume that's correct but I would state that's the case here and where the index appears in the order.

Author: Responded here: https://github.com/scverse/anndata/pull/882/files#r1086559577

    * MUST contain encoding metadata `"encoding-type: "dataframe"`, `"encoding-version": "0.2.0"`

>     * MUST contain `"column-order"` a string valued array denoting the order of column entries

Reviewer: or `string-valued`

* The group MUST contain a column for the index

> * Each entry in the group MUST correspond to an array with equivalent first dimensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Each entry in the group MUST correspond to an array with the equivalent first dimension
```

> * Each entry SHOULD share chunk sizes

Reviewer 2: Where are chunk sizes stored, I can't see them above? (also maybe it's worth explaining what they are?)

Author: The chunk sizes are a feature of the underlying zarr or hdf5 container – so the container handles this information. I'm a little reluctant to include explanations of the underlying containers here right now since it expands the scope.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough. If it's handled by the container maybe it doesn't need to be mentioned (or just add something to say that is the case)?

Author: ```suggestion
* Each entry SHOULD share chunk sizes (in the HDF5 or zarr container)
```

I've clarified a bit. I think it should be easier to look up now.

> ### Dataframe Specification (v0.2.0)
> 
> * A dataframe MUST be stored as a group
> * The group's metadata:
>     * MUST contain the field `"_index"`, which is the name of the column to be used as an index
>     * MUST contain encoding metadata `"encoding-type: "dataframe"`, `"encoding-version": "0.2.0"`
>     * MUST contain `"column-order"` an array of strings denoting the order of column entries
> * The group MUST contain a column for the index
> * Each entry in the group MUST correspond to an array with equivalent first dimensions

Author: ```suggestion
### Dataframe Specification (v0.2.0)

* A dataframe MUST be stored as a group
* The group's metadata:
    * MUST contain the field `"_index"`, whose value is the key of the array to be used as an index
    * MUST contain encoding metadata `"encoding-type": "dataframe"`, `"encoding-version": "0.2.0"`
    * MUST contain `"column-order"` an array of strings denoting the order of column entries
* The group MUST contain an array for the index
* The index array MUST NOT appear in 
* Each entry in the group MUST correspond to an array with equivalent first dimensions
```

Reviewer 2: I think that's good apart from the missing end of the sentence.

Just for my understanding where is the index stored if it's not a column? Is it still in the array but named something else? Or should the sentence say something like "MUST contain the field `"_index"`, whose value is the key of the _group containing an array_ to be used as an index? It's probably obvious, just my lack of familiarly with HDF5.

Author: > I think that's good apart from the missing end of the sentence.

Oh, I think I meant to actually remove that bullet, since that is allowed (maybe it shouldn't be)

> Just for my understanding where is the index stored if it's not a column?

It's still stored in the group. For example:

```python
>>> for k, v in f["obs"].items(): print(k, ":", dict(v.attrs))
Cell : {'encoding-type': 'string-array', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0'}
cell_type : {'encoding-type': 'categorical', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0', 'ordered': False}
label_by_score : {'encoding-type': 'categorical', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0', 'ordered': False}
log1p_n_genes_by_counts : {'encoding-type': 'array', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0'}
...
```

It's just not included as a column of the dataframe since it's not included in `f["obs"].attrs["column-order"]`.

One could have an array be both an index and a value inside the dataframe. This is actually probably a nice organizational practice. However, this could be a problem if you instead have an index and a column with the same names, but different values.

## Mappings

> Mappings are simply stored as `Group` s on disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mappings are simply stored as `Group`'s on disk.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Mappings are simply stored as `Group`s on disk.
```

These are distinct from DataFrames and sparse arrays since they don’t have any special attributes.
A `Group` is created for any `Mapping` in the AnnData object,
including the standard `obsm`, `varm`, `layers`, and `uns`.
Notably, this definition is used recursively within `uns`:

```python
>>> f["uns"].visititems(print)
[...]
pca <HDF5 group "/uns/pca" (2 members)>
pca/variance <HDF5 dataset "variance": shape (50,), type "<f4">
pca/variance_ratio <HDF5 dataset "variance_ratio": shape (50,), type "<f4">
[...]
```

### Mapping specifications (v0.1.0)

> * Each mapping MUST be it's own group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Each mapping MUST be its own group
```

* The groups metadata MUST contain the encoding metadata `"encoding-type": "dict"`, `"encoding-version": "0.1.0"`

## Scalars

Zero dimensional arrays are used for scalar values (i.e. single values like strings, numbers or booleans).
These should only occur inside of `uns`, and are commonly saved parameters:

```python
>>> f["uns/neighbors/params"].visititems(print)
method <HDF5 dataset "method": shape (), type "|O">
metric <HDF5 dataset "metric": shape (), type "|O">
n_neighbors <HDF5 dataset "n_neighbors": shape (), type "<i8">
>>> f["uns/neighbors/params/metric"][()]
'euclidean'
>>> dict(f["uns/neighbors/params/metric"].attrs)
{'encoding-type': 'string', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0'}
```

### Scalar specification (v0.2.0)

* Scalars MUST be written as a 0 dimensional array
* Numeric scalars
    * MUST have `"encoding-type": "numeric-scalar"`, `"encoding-version": "0.2.0"` in their metadata

>     * MUST be a single numeric value, including boolean, unsigned integer, signed integer,  floating point, or complex floating point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * MUST be a single numeric value, including boolean, unsigned integer, signed integer,  floating point, or complex floating point
```

Reviewer: there is never a dot at the end of the sentence (before or after) this is just to keep consistency

* String scalars
    * MUST have `"encoding-type": "string"`, `"encoding-version": "0.2.0"` in their metadata
    * In zarr, scalar strings MUST be stored as a fixed length unicode dtype
    * In HDF5, scalar strings MUST be stored as a variable length utf-8 encoded string dtype

## Categorical arrays

```python
>>> categorical = f["obs"]["cell_type"]
>>> dict(categorical.attrs)
{'encoding-type': 'categorical', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0', 'ordered': False}
```

> Discrete labels can be efficiently represented with categorical arrays (similar to `factors` in `R`).
> These arrays encode the labels as small width integers (`codes`), which map to the original label set (`categories`).
> We store these two arrays separately.

Author: ```suggestion
Discrete values can be efficiently represented with categorical arrays (similar to `factors` in `R`).
These arrays encode the values as small width integers (`codes`), which map to the original label set (`categories`).
Each entry in the `codes` array is the zero-based index of the encoded value in the `categories` array. 
To represent a missing value, a code of `-1` is used.
We store these two arrays separately.
```

```python
>>> categorical.visititems(print)
categories <HDF5 dataset "categories": shape (22,), type "|O">
codes <HDF5 dataset "codes": shape (38410,), type "|i1">
```

> ### Categorical array specifcation (v0.2.0)

Reviewer 3: specification

Author: Thanks for catching that!

Oops, had left spell check toggled off. Thought it was weird I didn't get anything wrong ...

* Categorical arrays MUST be stored as a group
* The group's metadata MUST contain the encoding metadata `"encoding-type": "categorical"`, `"encoding-version": "0.2.0"`
* The group's metadata MUST contain the boolean valued field `"ordered"`, which indicates whether the categories are ordered

> * The group MUST contain an integer valued array named `"codes"`

Reviewer 2: I know it's obvious to Python people but it might be worth stating these should start from 0

Author: I've addressed this a little here, but also above in the prose:https://github.com/scverse/anndata/pull/882/files#r1086580754

```suggestion
* The group MUST contain an integer valued array named `"codes"` whose maximum value is the number of categories - 1
```

>     * The `"codes"` array MAY contain signed integer values. If so, the code `-1` denotes a missing value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * The `"codes"` array MAY contain signed integer values. If so, the code `-1` denotes a missing value
```

* The group MUST contain an array called `"categories"`

## String arrays

Arrays of strings are handled differently than numeric arrays since numpy doesn't really have a good way of representing arrays of unicode strings.

> `anndata` assumes strings are text like data, so are variable length.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`anndata` assumes strings are text like data, so they are variable length.
```

Author: ```suggestion
`anndata` assumes strings are text-like data, so uses a variable length encoding.
```

```python
>>> dict(categorical["categories"].attrs)
{'encoding-type': 'string-array', 'encoding-version': '0.2.0'}
```

### String array specifications (v0.2.0)

* String arrays MUST be stored in arrays
* The arrays's metadata MUST contain the encoding metadata `"encoding-type": "string-array"`, `"encoding-version": "0.2.0"`
* In `zarr`, string arrays MUST be stored using `numcodecs`' `VLenUTF8` codec.

> * In `HDF5`, string arrays MUST be stored using the variable length string data type, with a utf-8 encoding.

Reviewer: here again dot at the end of sentence

Author: ```suggestion
* In `zarr`, string arrays MUST be stored using `numcodecs`' `VLenUTF8` codec
* In `HDF5`, string arrays MUST be stored using the variable length string data type, with a utf-8 encoding
```

> ## Nullable integers and booleans

Reviewer 2: Can you only do this with integers and booleans? What if you have a string DataFrame column with missing values?

Author: So, that's the plan, but hasn't been done yet due to the in-memory representation. At the time I created the issue it seemed like pandas was going to figure this out soon, but I don't believe that has happened.

https://github.com/scverse/anndata/issues/679

We support IO with Pandas nullable integer and boolean arrays.
We represent these on disk similar to `numpy` masked arrays, `julia` nullable arrays, or `arrow` validity bitmaps (see {issue}`504` for more discussion).

> That is, we store a indicator array (or mask) of null values alongside the array of all values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is, we store an indicator array (or mask) of null values alongside the array of all values.
```

>>> int_array = pd.array([1, None, 3, 4])
>>> int_array
<IntegerArray>
[1, <NA>, 3, 4]
Length: 4, dtype: Int64
>>> write_elem(h5_file, "nullable_integer", int_array)

>>> h5_file["nullable_integer"].visititems(print)
mask <HDF5 dataset "mask": shape (4,), type "|b1">
values <HDF5 dataset "values": shape (4,), type "<i8">

>>> dict(h5_file["nullable_integer"].attrs)
{'encoding-type': 'nullable-integer', 'encoding-version': '0.1.0'}
```

### Nullable integer specifications (v0.1.0)

* Nullable integers MUST be stored as a group
* The group's attributes MUST have contain the encoding metadata `"encoding-type": "nullable-integer"`, `"encoding-version": "0.1.0"`
* The group MUST contain an integer valued array under the key `"values"`
* The group MUST contain an boolean valued array under the key `"mask"`

### Nullable boolean specifications (v0.1.0)

* Nullable booleans MUST be stored as a group
* The group's attributes MUST have contain the encoding metadata `"encoding-type": "nullable-boolean"`, `"encoding-version": "0.1.0"`
* The group MUST contain an boolean valued array under the key `"values"`
* The group MUST contain an boolean valued array under the key `"mask"`

> * The `"values"` and `"mask"` array MUST be the same shape

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `"values"` and `"mask"` array MUST be of the same shape
```

Author: ```suggestion
* The `"values"` and `"mask"` arrays MUST be the same shape
```
